R 281414Z AUG 15
FM COMCOGARD FORCECOM NORFOLK VA//FC-C//
TO ALCOAST
BT
UNCLAS // N01040//
ALCOAST 340/15
COMDTNOTE 1040
SUBJ: OBLIGATED SERVICE (OBLISERV) REQUIREMENT TO ATTEND CLASS A SCHOOL
A. Performance, Training, and Education Manual, COMDTINST M1500.10 (series)
B. Military Assignment and Authorized Absences, COMDTINST M1000.8 (series)
C. Enlisted Accessions, Evaluations, and Advancements, COMDTINST M1000.2 (series)
1. This message announces an update to obligated service requirements in reference (A) requiring
members to obligate service for a full tour of duty per Section 1.A.4.b of reference (B) to attend 
Class A School.
2. Obligated Service Requirement for attending Class A School.
     A. Active Duty and Reserve Members must comply with obligated service requirements prior to 
executing permanent change of station, temporary additional duty, or temporary duty under 
instruction orders to Class A School. The obligated service requirement for Class A School is 
calculated from the course convening date and is the number of training days per the curriculum 
outline plus 24-months. Class A School training durations can be found on the Training Quota 
Management Center’s website at http://www2.tracenpetaluma.com/tqc/aschool.asp. It is a 
recommended best practice to refer to this site each time Class A School orders are cut as the 
course durations can change. Members will not incur additional obligated service due to course 
schedule changes made after the initial OBLISERV, remedial training, or rephasals once at Class
A School. 
     B. Unit Servicing Personnel Offices (SPO) will verify that member’s current enlistment 
contract is sufficient for meeting obligated service requirements prior to executing orders to 
Class A School. Members with insufficient time remaining on their current enlistment contract may 
execute an agreement to extend or reenlist per reference (C), with their unit SPO. 
     C. Members who decline to obligate service will have their orders cancelled and be removed 
from the A School waiting list. 
     D. Within three days of arrival at Class A School, members without the required obligated 
service will be offered the opportunity to extend or reenlist. Members refusing to reenlist or 
extend will be disenrolled at the convenience of the government. Failure to obligate service is 
considered a Fault Disenrollment and subject to the policy contained in reference (C).
3. Disenrollment. Personnel disenrolled from the course of instruction due to own request, lack 
of application, or misconduct will be required to fulfill their remaining service obligation. 
Personnel disenrolled for academic, humanitarian, or for the good of the Coast Guard may route a 
request memo to Commander, Coast Guard Personnel Service Center (PSC) (epm-1) or (rpm-2) to have 
the obligated service requirement rescinded or reduced.
4. Implementation. 
     A. Members holding orders or attending Class A School on or before this message release date 
are subject to their previous obligation agreement.
     B. Members in receipt of orders to Class A School after this message release date are subject 
to the obligation requirements outlined in paragraph two above.
5. Contact your unit SPO for questions regarding extensions, enlistments and obligated service 
calculations and policy. For questions concerning this ALCOAST please contact LCDR Katy Coombs at 
(202) 475-5507.
6. This change in policy will be incorporated into the next update of reference (A).  
7. Released by RDML David Throop, Commander, Force Readiness Command.
8. Internet release authorized.
